Jerusalem is one of the
oldest cities in the world,
having been continuously inhabited
for close to six millennia.
The old walled city that occupies an area
of less than one square kilometer,
is sacred in Judaism, Christianity, and Islam.
The Church of the Holy Sepulchre
is the most sacred place in Christianity
where Jesus was both crucified and entombed
before rising from the dead.
The site where Solomon's and Herod's temples were located
is actively debated.
The only thing the researchers seem to agree upon
is that it was somewhere on the Temple Mount.
Locating the temple precisely is a priority for Jews
because the Rock of Foundation
within the temple's Holy of Holies
is the most sacred place in Judaism.
For centuries, it has been assumed that this rock
is the same stone whereupon Abraham nearly sacrificed Isaac
and from which Mohammed ascended into heaven.
Namely the bedrock upon which the Dome of the Rock
stands today.
You can see in this cutaway
how this Sufi shrine was built to worship this bedrock.
My favorite theory comes from Dr. Ashur Kaufman in 1991.
He claims that the Jewish Foundation Stone
is located just north of the Dome of the Rock
in a small section of exposed bedrock
currently under the diminutive Dome of the Tablets.
The echo of tablets in the Dome's name
is actually circumstantial evidence
suggesting correlation with the tablets
of the Ten Commandments.
These most famous tablets
were stored in the Ark of the Covenant,
which of course was located within the Holy of Holies
within Solomon's temple.
However, the main reason I subscribed to this theory
is that it fits the larger geometry of the city
as proposed by John Michell and Christine Rhone
in their book, Twelve-Tribe Nations.
Michell and Rhone have drawn a five-by-twelve rectangle
over Jerusalem,
matching the proportion of rectangles
we've studied all over the world.
The Jerusalem rectangle is anchored
in the ancient Jaffa Gate
and opposite city wall corner point here.
Its right edge parallels the Temple Mount.
Richard Heath showed in Sacred Number,
that when we draw equal x's
within the rectangle,
the crossing points pass directly over the Rock of Calvary,
inside the Church of the Holy Sepulchre
where Jesus was crucified
and over the Jewish Rock of Foundation
under the Dome of the Tablets.
In other words, these x's
precisely mark the holiest spots
in Christianity and Judaism.
Measuring the rectangle uncovers something more.
The length is equal to 1,728 cubits of 1.728 feet each.
That's a double reference to the number
we learned in Washington, DC, symbolizes a cube.
In Judaism, the Holy of Holies within Solomon's Temple
had very specific proportions
as described in the Torah.
It was a cube measuring 20 cubits on each side.
The holiest spot in Islam is Mecca.
More specifically, it is the Kaaba within Mecca,
which all Muslims are supposed to visit
at least once in their lives.
Kaaba means cube.
Indeed the object of their veneration is a giant black cube.
The word, Kabbalah, which means knowledge
in Jewish Mysticism,
also references a cube.
In Greek mythology,
Apollo and Artemis were born on the small island of Delos.
As the story goes, the citizens of Delos
consulted the Oracle at Delphi
to learn how to defeat a plague sent by Apollo.
The Oracle responded that they must
double the volume of their cubic altar to Apollo.
This rather difficult problem involving the cube root of two
was known as the Delian problem in mathematics,
which was later solved
by the Pythagorean philosopher, Archytas.
Why are so many of the most important places
symbolized by cubes?
Recall that the cubit that measures Jerusalem
is 1.728 English feet exactly.
1.728 is equal to
six over five
raised to the third power.
I suggest you do the math to verify this is so.
Come to think of it, the word cubit
clearly comes from the word cube.
So Jerusalem is symbolized by the volume of a cube,
whose edge length relates macrocosm to microcosm.
If you dimension the Jerusalem rectangle in this way,
with two depictions of six and five,
you'll see the x's themselves
as representations of the great enigma of alchemy,
namely the relationship between six and five.
Perhaps not surprisingly,
the cubit that measures 1.728 English feet,
is actually the canonical Egyptian cubit.
Author Ahmed Osman puts forward the controversial
but never refuted theory,
that Moses was actually the Egyptian pharaoh, Akhenaten.
Both were powerful monotheists who were educated in Egypt.
It's certainly a theory worth contemplating.
Many of the most significant events in Jesus's life
are lined up along an axis.
First of all, Jesus spent time teaching his disciples
on the Mount of Olives.
Jesus rode into Jerusalem on Palm Sunday
through this oldest of gates in Jerusalem city walls,
called the Golden Gate in Christian tradition.
I can't help but think of the bridge in San Francisco.
Here's Giotto's depiction of Mary's parents,
Joachim and Anne, meeting at The Golden Gate.
In Jewish tradition, this same gate
is the one through which the Messiah will enter Jerusalem
at some unknown point in the future.
However, Suleiman the Magnificent
sealed off the Golden Gate in 1541,
literally to prevent the Messiah's entrance
and the Golden Gate and Temple Mount
remain under Islamic control today.
As you know, this tension between Muslims and Jews
has persisted up to the present day.
Jesus upset the moneychangers' tables
in Herod's temple here,
if we accept the Kaufman theory
as to the location of the Second Temple.
The Garden of Gethsemane
is the place where Jesus prayed
the night before his crucifixion.
This is the place where he is said to have sweat
drops of blood.
As tradition has it, the crucifixion happened at Calvary,
and his body was placed in the Holy Sepulchre,
just a few dozen feet away.
Isn't it amazing
that most of the important events in Christianity
took place along an axis
connecting the center of the x's in this diagram.
Before we leave Jerusalem,
I want to detour to a place you would
probably never expect me to go.
Winnipeg, Canada.
It's the capital of Manitoba, eh?
Architectural historian Frank Albo
has discovered the Manitoba Legislative Building
is not only a reconstruction of Solomon's Temple,
but is loaded with secrets in plain sight.
The architect Frank Worthington Simon
designed this 1920 building
to be veiled in allegory and illustrated with symbols
only his Freemasonic brothers would understand.
In fact, every premier who worked in this building
from 1870 to 1967, was a Freemason.
Two Egyptian sphinxes flank the entrance
just as they do in front of the House of the Temple
in Washington, DC.
The top of the dome features a thirteen foot high
gilded statue of Mercury,
the same golden boy we'll meet again in Paris.
After going up two flights of thirteen steps,
one enters a cubic space measuring 66.6 feet on edge.
We'll uncover the unexpected meaning of 666
in the most surprising of places in Paris.
It's probably not what you think.
According to Albo's research,
two, thirteen foot high, bronze bisons
identify this as a cleansing room in temple vernacular.
Going up another flight of thirteen steps,
one arrives in the Rotunda.
There's a mural on the wall of the Rotunda
above the entrance to the Manitoba Legislative Assembly,
that extensively depicts World War I.
However, a man wearing a white robe,
with exposed chest, being supported by his brother,
identifies him as an initiate
in the first Masonic degree ceremony.
Albo identifies this mural as the altar
in what is secretly an initiation chamber.
Looking up in the rotunda,
you see the underside of the central dome
the golden boy is perched upon.
And looking down a level
through an oculus in the floor,
reveals a fascinating space called the
Pool of the Black Star.
Just off the Rotunda,
is the Lt. Governor's Reception Suite,
which is the only space in the building
off limits to the public.
Albo got special permission to measure the chamber
and discovered it's a cube
having and edge length of 20 cubits.
These are precisely the same dimensions
as the Holy of Holies within Solomon's temple.
A place that was also obviously off limits to the public.
But if this represents the Holy of Holies
within Solomon's Temple,
where is the Ark of the Covenant?
Albo discovered it's directly above this suite
on the building exterior.
The War Chest, as it's known, if flanked by two warriors,
which one can accurately identify
as raiders of the lost Ark.
This building is clearly amazing,
but why is it here?
Albo points out that Winnipeg is the geographical center
of North America.
The Black Star at the heart of the Legislative Building,
was deliberately placed upon this navel point.
Okay, but what is the building really doing?
I think the Manitoba Legislative Building
was designed as a magical talisman, to harvest,
or in some sense control, the energies of North America.
Consider a much older example
of this type of talismanic magic.
Old Sarum, which is the center point
of ley lines in England,
dates from the same era as Stonehenge,
Avebury and Silbury hill.
This radiating topology reminds me of
one other magical artifact.
The sun disk worshiped during the
reign of King Tut's father, the Pharaoh Akhenaten.
If you think believing in magic is childish,
consider Walt Disney's so-called Magic Kingdom.
Did you know Disneyland has a mysterious Club 33,
which is not open to the general public?
We know from studying DC
how important the number 33 is to Masons.
Club 33 memberships cost $20,000,
and it's the only place in Disneyland
where alcohol is served.
There's clearly more going on in the Magic Kingdom
than meets the eye.
I think the Black Star at the center of North America
holds a much deeper secret.
Physicist Nassim Haramein,
whom you'll hear more about in Rome,
believes that Moses took a compact power source
out of the Great Pyramid,
and placed it inside the Ark of the Covenant
before he left Egypt.
Haramein showed how the Ark fits precisely
within the misnamed sarcophagus inside the king's chamber,
within the Great Pyramid.
It was misnamed because no mummy has ever been found
in an Egyptian pyramid.
By the way, the granite box's exterior volume
is exactly double its interior volume,
a mathematical relationship echoed thousands of years later
in the Delian problem that plagued the Greeks.
Considering the evidence,
I think the Ark was an Egyptian artifact
before it became the most sacred object in Judaism.
In any case, Haramein believes the power source
inside the Ark
was a mini black hole.
During their exodus from Egypt,
the Bible says the Israelites
followed a pillar of cloud by day
and a pillar of fire by night.
Haramein claims the mini black holes stored in the Ark
would have produced just such a fiery vortex
rising like a pillar.
Haramein's physics show that stars are really black holes
under a mantle of trapped matter.
Sun spots are black
because they literally are vortices in the mantle
that expose the black hole inside the sun.
The pool of the black star
reveals this great cosmic secret
to those who can decode the secrets in plain site.
Perhaps there is no where else in the world
with more layers of history and symbolism
than Jerusalem.
I can think of no better example of this
than in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre.
Its architecture is a patchwork
made from so many untold layers.
Calvary chapel is built on the first foot or so
of the rock upon which Jesus is said to have been crucified.
Excavation that took place in 1973
revealed a chapel
some 15 feet under this rock, called the Tomb of Adam,
where the first human skull is said to be visible
in the rock face.
In fact, the term calvary, comes from the Latin
Calvariae Locus, which is Golgotha in Greek,
or the Place of the Skull, in English.
Prior to the first Christian emperor,
Constantine the Great,
repurposing this site as the Church of the Holy Sepulchre,
it had been a temple of Venus.
Before the Romans worshiped Venus,
she was known in the Greek world as Aphrodite.
And if we dig deeply enough,
we find yet another layer on top of the Egyptian Isis.
The notion of Christianity layering Egyptianism
is nothing new.
Here is Albrecht Durer's Renaissance depiction
of The Man of Sorrows by the column.
Note Christ's unmistakable Egyptian crook and flail posture.
This is Durer's secret depiction of Christ as Osiris,
the resurrected God.
Durer then shows Christ being flagellated with said symbols
in this later etching.
Here is Osiris with his characteristic crook and flail
in the Egyptian Book of the Dead.
Osiris as Lord of the Dead,
presides over the weighing of souls ceremony.
Anubis measures the dead man's heart on the scale
against Ma'at's feather of truth.
Her husband Thoth, scribe of the Gods,
records the result.
If the heart is lighter than the feather,
Horus will present the man's soul to Osiris in the Duat.
But if not, it will be devoured by the deadly Ammut,
the monster who was part crocodile, lion, and hippopotamus.
Ma'at is currently personified as Lady Justice,
holding scales and sword.
Lady Justice adorns court houses around the world.
Here she is in the Old Supreme Court Chamber
in the US Capital.
The Scales of Justice were also used in Christianity
in the last judgement.
Here are 15th century depictions,
showing souls being weighed and judged.
The beasts of hell certainly recall the terror
inspired by Ammut.
Spell 125 in the Egyptian Book of the Dead
lists what later became the Ten Commandments
in Judeo Christian theology.
Everything goes back to Egypt.
If you ask someone off the street
where the holiest spot in Christianity is,
you probably won't hear
the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem.
Most will think of St. Peter's Basilica in Rome.
The word peter, literally means rock,
and when Jesus said, upon this rock I will build my church,
Simon became Peter.
Thinking on all the rocks I've been studying in Jerusalem,
it was natural for me to draw a line
from the rock of Golgotha
to the tomb of St. Peter in Rome.
Here we go again.
The line connecting Golgotha with the tomb of St. Peter
passes directly over the center of the Campidoglio,
marked today by the equestrian statue
of Marcus Aurelius.
What we see in the Campidoglio
is Michelangelo's vision for the
top of the Capitoline Hill,
the ancient world's original capital.
It took a Renaissance genius to symbolically
turn the Roman power equation on its head.
So instead of having the Capitoline
face the ancient Roman forum,
as it had for two millennia,
Michelangelo turned the Campidoglio 180 degrees
to face the Vatican.
The Campidoglio's painting pattern
depicts a twelve pointed elliptical star,
symbolizing a zodiac, with the sun at the center.
It is my contention that his long distance alignment
was originally drawn to connect the seat of power in Rome
with the Temple of Venus in Jerusalem.
In the Christian era, the tomb of St. Peter in the Vatican,
was strategically located
to be a continuation in line with this ancient axis.
It is no secret that Christian churches
were often built atop places of ancient worship.
In this way, pagan shrines were Christianized
and their power absorbed into the body of the church.
See how the alignment goes directly over the
Arch of Septimius Severus?
The line passes only a few feet away
from the Umbilicus Urbis Romae, the Navel Stone,
from which all distances in the Roman Empire
were measured.
All roads that led to Rome symbolically arrived here.
Following the alignment through the Forum,
we see that it goes through the center of the
Roman Colosseum, where among other pastimes,
spectators enjoyed gladiatorial combat
and watching Christians being fed to the lions.
This shape in the center of the Colosseum bowl
suggests vesica piscis.
Could this be a symbol of Venus?
If so, what went on in the Colosseum
somehow became the opposition of the love and beauty
associated with Venus.
The last stop on our alignment tour,
is the largest ancient Egyptian obelisk in the world,
including all of those still standing in Egypt.
The alignment from Jerusalem
passes directly over the tip of this 230 ton symbol
in front of the Lateran.
As you may have guessed,
obelisks are one of the keys
to unlocking the ancient mysteries.
This obelisk wasn't always in front of the Lateran.
It originally came from the temple of Karnak in Egypt
and was moved to Rome by Constantine the Great's son
in the 4th century.
The last of the Renaissance popes, Sixtus the 5th,
moved the obelisk from where it had been
in the Circus Maximus, to the Lateran,
displacing the equestrian statue of Marcus Aurelius,
which as you know was moved to the Campidoglio.
Now Sixtus the 5th was a very singular pope.
As is the custom when a pope dies,
the new pope chooses a name for himself.
I find it fascinating that Felice Peretti di Montalto
chose a name referencing both six and five,
in Sixtus the 5th.
The fact is Sixtus the 5th redesigned much of Rome
during his brief five year reign.
He considered moving the Church of the Holy Sepulchre
in Jerusalem, to Rome,
but the logistics proved to be too much.
He did, however, succeed at moving
four gigantic Egyptian Obelisks within Rome,
completing the dome of St. Peter's, opening six streets,
building 14 fountains, and much more.
Roman emperors were the first to raid Egypt
in antiquity for its obelisks.
By repositioning these obelisks in Renaissance Rome,
Sixuth the 5th was motivated by something
other than Catholicism.
Researchers Jan Wicherink and Aaron Parlier
reveal much of what Sixtus the 5th was up to.
The red line shows a pair of obelisks
aligned to the summer solstice sunrise.
The blue line shows another pair of obelisks
aligned to the winter solstice sunrise.
Sixtus the 5th placed Egyptian obelisks
in St. Peter's Square and in the Piazza del Popolo
exactly as they are
to create the red astronomical alignment.
He engaged in a bit of urban renewal
by opening a straight street
connecting the ancient Roman obelisks
at the top of the Spanish steps
and in front of Santa Maria Maggiore
to make the blue astronomical alignment visible.
Balancing the masculine symbol of the obelisk,
Sixtus the 5th restored an ancient aqueduct
and built fountains symbolizing the feminine
to accompany most obelisks.
Four fountains mark the crossing
of the blue and yellow lines
connecting the Fontana dei Dioscuri
and the Aqua Felice,
all watery creations of Sixtus the 5th.
The green line connecting the Vatican Obelisk
with the four fountains
marks equinoctial sunrise.
Sixtus the 5th's tomb in the Basilica of Santa Maria Magiore
was his final gesture,
linking his tomb with the astronomical alignments
he set up in Rome.
Why was Sixtus the 5th obsessed with astronomical symbolism?
Perhaps because astronomy is another key
to the ancient mysteries.
In addition to the solar symbolism
mentioned in the Washington, DC Part II episode,
Bernini's redesign of St. Peter's Square
has a deeper reading.
Wicherink and Parlier claimed the two fountains
flanking the obelisk
represent a liquid axis,
symbolizing the galactic midplane of the Milky Way.
The axis going through the Basilica is the ecliptic,
and the other four paths
represent solstices and equinoxes.
In other words, the galactic and earth crosses
coming together is an astronomical take
on the underlying meaning of the solar octagram star.
To top it all off,
the Vatican Obelisk is surmounted by a cross.
The official story is that this massive pagan symbol
was Christianized in the simplest of ways
by putting a little cross on top.
Hancock and Bavaul write in Talisman,
that an obelisk with a cross on top
is actually the hieroglyph for Heliopolis,
the city where this obelisk supposedly came from.
On Christmas morning,
this is the astronomical view from Vatican Square.
Wicherink and Parlier have observed
that this silver gate of birth
is due east of the obelisk in St. Peter's Square
on the birthday of the savior.
I noticed that the Galactic midplane
leads right down to the Roman Pantheon.
This is our cue to have a look at this ancient Roman marvel
and explore its deeper meaning.
Patrick Hunt, who teaches
classical archaeology at Stanford University,
calls the Pantheon
the most impressive Roman monumental building
in the world.
I see it as a calendar in stone.
Its rotunda is an engineering marvel
employing techniques such as reinforced concrete,
not rediscovered until almost 2,000 years later.
In this plan view,
you can see the floor pattern in which stone
from all over the empire was inlaid.
A testament to Rome's imperial might.
Its circle and square motif might symbolize
the earth moon system in the following way.
Here a circle is inscribed within a square.
The square has 27.3% more area than the circle.
Comparing a circle in square
with equal perimeters,
the circle's diameter is 27.3%
larger than the edge of the square.
Okay, so what?
Well the moon happens to be 27.3% the size of earth,
which is another way of relating moon to earth
with the proportion three to 11.
In addition, the moon's sidereal orbital period
is 27.3 days.
The words moon, month, and menstruation
all share the same root
because they all have roughly the same period.
Human gestation lasts on average 273 days.
Another spooky coincidence has to do with temperature.
As you are probably aware,
celsius is defined by a 100 degree scale,
marking the freezing and boiling points of water.
Water becomes liquid 273 degrees celsius
above absolute zero.
Here are these numbers again.
It seems to me that this fact
references earth as a water planet.
Why are these numbers the same?
Science has no answer for this other than pure coincidence.
In this sectional view,
you can see that a sphere fits perfectly within the volume
the Pantheon encloses.
I think recognizing this as the celestial sphere
is the key to the Pantheon symbolism.
The original roman statuary
fit into the seven alcoves.
The Pantheon of pagan gods
was replaced with Christian saints.
When the building was christened,
the Church of Santa Maria Rotunda in the year 609.
Exchanging pagan gods for astrological symbols,
we see an arrangement matching the Ptolemaic
harmony of the spheres.
To the modern eye, this sequence might seem arbitrary,
but it actually ranks the planets in order of increasing
apparent speed against the background of fixed stars
as seen from earth.
Ptolemaic cosmology is therefore an earthcentric approach
to astronomy.
Mark Booth writes, in The Secret History of the World,
"Ptolemy's map of the spheres
"is conventionally presented as having been
"superseded by the ideas of Copernicus,
"Galileo, and so onl but in fact was and is an
"accurate map of the spiritual dimension of the cosmos,
"a dimension which seemed more real
"to the ancients than the material cosmos."
Are you aware that the days of the week
are named after the planets?
With the exception of Saturnday, Sunday, and Moonday,
English speakers unfamiliar with Norse gods,
might have an easier time spotting this connection in French
or Italian.
Connecting the days of the week in order,
yields a seven pointed star
somewhat distorted to accomodate squeezing it into the
octagonal symmetry of the Pantheon.
Looking up in the rotunda, you see the oculus,
or central void in the dome.
The oculus is the sole source of illumination
in the interior.
So it clearly symbolizes the sun.
The five rising tiers of coffers
might represent the five planets
visible with the naked eye from earth.
The 28 divisions around the circumference
is where things really get interesting.
It is my contention that the 28 rays represent days.
Consider a month of four, seven day weeks,
lasting 28 days.
Thirteen such months
add up to 364 days.
The extra day need to round out a 365 day year
is where we get the phrase, a year and a day.
Richard Heath has traced this 13 month
plus one day calendar,
to the matriarchal societies of the Bronze Age.
The Egyptian Sothic year lasted exactly 365 days,
without compensating for leap year as we do today.
Sothis is the Greek name for Sirius,
the star the Egyptians based their new year on.
Any way that Father Time slices it,
the 28 day division fits the Osiris story.
The temple of Isis on the island of Philae
has spa reliefs which tell the Osiris story.
Here Osiris has 28 stalks of wheat emerging from
his dead body.
The 13 pieces that Isis later reassembled
symbolized the 13 month calendar of 28 day months,
and his missing phallus represents the extra day,
rounding out the Sothic year.
Many religious stories encrypt astronomical information
in their core levels.
Returning to Egypt for more wisdom,
let's take a look at the earth moon diagram
that came from studying the Great Pyramid.
Recall how the relative sizes of moon and earth
fit the diagram when the circle was squared.
John Michell rediscovered the key to much more ancient
wisdom still encrypted in this diagram.
In his book, The Dimensions of Paradise,
Michell expanded the number of spheres in the diagram
from one to twelve
for reasons that will soon become apparent.
If the mean diameter of the moon is 2,160 miles,
then the 12 moon evolution in the diagram
encodes the great year.
2,160 times 12
equals 25,920,
which is earth's precessional period.
Each month is so-called great year,
is likened to an age in astrology.
We are currently leaving the Age of Pisces
and it's the dawning of the Age of Aquarius.
John Michell calls this The New Jerusalem diagram
from his analysis of the revelation of St. John.
A seven-pointed star resonates within.
Remember the seven rayed diadem of Isis
and the seven rays of the Statue of Liberty?
I prefer to call this the Isis Diagram
in reference to the older stream of knowledge
coming out of Egypt.
The Isis Diagram encodes just intonation in music.
On the most basic level,
consider one octave of a piano keyboard.
A total of twelve notes
are divided by sharps,
leaving seven white keys.
The term sharp suggests the pointy heptagram
doesn't it?
As we'll soon see at Chartres Cathedral,
music, along with astronomy, geometry,
and number theory, are all keys
to this ancient mystery.
Expanding the Isis Diagram to contain
four seven pointed stars,
we have what I call the Osiris Diagram,
which encodes the Sothic year of 365 days
in the following way.
The 28 tips of the stars
represent days in the ancient month.
12 circles surround a 13th
located at the center of the stars.
The circles represent months.
13 months of 28 days each
defines the year.
The earth circle underlying the sars
represents the extra day
and completion of the Sothic year.
And the Sothic year was itself calibrated
by the heliacal rising of the Star of Isis
consort to Osiris.
It's beautiful, the way the geometry
matches the cosmology.
The architecture of the universe is embedded
in Egyptian cosmology.
To perceive the larger ramifications of the cosmology
we are rediscovering,
let's break away from 2-D diagrams,
and expore where we live,
the third dimension.
It's a 3-D reality that 12 spheres fit perfectly
around a central 13th,
with all of them tangent to each other.
All the 13 fit perfectly within an overarching sphere.
I think this 3-D reality
is the source of the obsession with the number 13
that we've seen symbolized in so many places.
Recall all the lucky 13s
on the Great Seal of the United States.
Lucky 13 might be more precisely described
as 12 surrounding one.
In The Last Supper,
Da Vinci depicts Jesus in the center
surrounded by twelve apostles.
Geometrically speaking, connecting the centers
of the 12 surrounding spheres with straight lines
reveals what is called
the cuboctahedron.
The cuboctahedron has faces
composed of squares and triangles.
Ad quadratum et ad trangulum,
as they would say in the middle ages.
As it turns out,
Cuboctahedral sphere-packing
has exactly seven planes of symmetry.
Do these numbers sound familiar?
12 around one, with seven planes of symmetry?
The cuboctahedron is the 3-D equivalent
of the Isis Diagram.
The first ever known depiction of a cuboctaheron
was drawn by Leonardo Da Vinci.
He created this illustration for Luca Pacioli's book,
De divina proportione.
Pacioli and Da Vinci worked together,
became close friends
and later shared a house together in Florence.
Pacioli was at the center of the Renaissance
Hermetic obsession begun by Cosimo de Medici
in 1430 when he obtained the Corpus Hermetica,
a body of work compiled in the first few centuries
of the common era,
recounting words passed down by Thoth
through the last of the Egyptian priesthood in Alexandria.
Here is Pacioli with a mysterious
transparent cuboctahedron half filled with water.
Some believe the younger man standing next to him
is Albrecht Durer.
In Divine Proportion, Priya Hemenway writes,
"In the autumn of 1506,
"Albrecht Durer wrote from Venice to Bologna
"to the home of Luca Pacioli
"in order to be initiated
"in the mysteries of a secret perspective."
Clearly the cuboctrahedron was important
to these Renaissance masters immersed in Hermetic knowledge.
Perhaps they knew something we don't.
In the 20th century, Buckminster Fuller was obsessed
with the cuboctahedron.
He called it the Dymaxian
and built his philosophy around it
because the cuboctahedron is the only polyhedron
completely in equilibrium.
All 12 vectors emanating from its core
have equal angles
in all of its internal and external edges have equal length.
In the 21st century, the cuboctahedron
is the foundation for physicist Nassim Haramein's
Unified Field Theory,
that offers a new solution to Einstein's Field Equations.
Haramein claims that the vacuum,
a term used by physicists
to refer to a volume of space that is completely
devoid of matter,
actually has a structure,
and this structure is based at the
core on the cuboctahedron.
What we perceive as empty space
is actually a seething cauldron of energy.
Physicists calculate
that the amount of energy in each and every cubic centimeter
of space
exceeds the energy output of all stars
visible to the Hubble Space Telescope.
The reason space seems empty
is because all that energy is perfectly balanced
in a state of equilibrium.
It looks to us like nothing is there.
Haramein has built his entire Unified Theory of Physics
on cuboctahedral geometry.
I believe Haramein is really onto something.
His latest paper, The Schwarzchild Proton,
received the Best Paper Award
in a physics symposium in 2009.
Modern physics seems to be catching up
with ancient knowledge.
To understand astronomy,
one needs to have some background.
Here's my crash course on esoteric astronomy
in six quick lessons.
The earth revolves about the sun
in a plane called the ecliptic.
The 12 constellations of fixed stars
that intersect the ecliptic
are called the zodiac.
All the stars of the zodiac
are actually our close neighbors
compared to the size of our entire galaxy.
The earth's equator is tilted some 23-and-a-half degrees
with respect to the Ecliptic.
Gary Osborn's fascinating Paradigmshift website
shows how the angle of the earth's tilt
is symbolized in art.
Here are Isis and Osiris raising the Djed,
which amazingly matches the angle of the earth's tilt.
And here again the 23-and-a-half degree angle
matches the slope of the pyramid on the dollar bill.
Osborn has found this same angle symbolized
in many other pieces of esoteric art.
The earth's tilt is the reason we experience seasons.
The seasons are defined by the earth's orbit,
which contains two solstices
and two equinoxes.
Looking at the solar system from above,
the seasons naturally make a cross.
Wicherink and Parlier call this the Earth cross.
Our galaxy is called the Milky Way
because its myriad stars resemble
milk streaking our night skies.
If you are able to look at our galaxy edge on,
you would see it as a flattened disc.
This flattened structure
is what makes the Milky Way
look like a narrowly defined streak in the sky
rather than an even distribution of stars.
The central plain of the galactic disk
is called its midplane.
The ecliptic is tilted some 120 degrees
with respect to the midplane,
naturally making a cross in two dimensions.
Wicherink and Parlier called this the Galactic cross.
Imagine beginning a journey outside the galaxy
flying through the zodiac,
passing by each one of the visible planets
and stopping on earth for a while.
After a short stay, you begin the journey home,
traveling out past the planets
through the zodiac,
and on toward the center of the galaxy.
This root describes the mystical journey of the soul.
It is mirrored in the Ptolemaic, or geocentric, cosmology
that predated Copernicanism.
The ancient Egyptians represented
beginning and ending waypoints
along the journey of the soul
with silver and golden gates.
Wicherink and Parlier show that the
direction of the silver gate
is located between the horns of Taurus
as seen from earth.
You can find the horns by following
Orion the Hunter's club
or Monoceros the Unicorn's horn
because both point at the intersection
of the galactic midplane and the ecliptic,
a point known to the Egyptians as the Silver Gate.
Isis shown with horns framing the sun disk
symbolizes her guardianship of the silver gate
or gate of birth.
On the opposite side of the zodiac,
the golden gate is located close to
where the arrow of Sagittarius is pointing
and where the stinger of Scorpio is reaching.
The golden gate is the second place
where the galactic midplane and ecliptic intersect.
The winged scarab framing a sun disk
was used to symbolize guardianship
over the golden gate, or gate of death.
The scarab is an appropriate symbol
because of how this insect pushes dung balls
backwards with its hind legs,
mimicking the sun's retrograde precessional motion
through the zodiac.
The Coat of Arms for the state of Vatican City
features silver and gold keys
because these are the keys to the kingdom
that Christ gave to Peter.
Pietro Perugino's fresco in the Sistine Chapel
shows Christ giving one silver and one gold
key to Peter.
I see the two Roman arches
flanking the fresco
as secretly depicting the Egyptian silver and golden gates.
The octagonal domed building in the center
clearly represents the sun,
and the perspective grid must be the ecliptic.
The people in the piazza are taking the
journey of the soul.
I was taught as a child
to follow the outer edge of the big dipper
to find the North Star Polaris.
in the past this rule of thumb didn't always work
because the celestial pole changes over time
due to the earth's precession.
when the Great Pyramid was built,
the star Thuban in the constellation Draco
was the North Star.
Remember one of the pyramid shafts
point at Thuban.
The celestial pole
actually traces out a circle in the heavens
representing the 25,920 year
precessional cycle.
This cycle is called the Great Year.
In 3-D, the Great Year is seen as a precessional cone
swept out over time by the earth's tilted axis.
The earth's precessional cone,
the sun, and the galactic midplane,
will precisely align on winter solstice 2012.
Author John Major Jenkins calls this phenomenon
Galactic Alignment.
The Mayan Long Count calendar
was designed to end on winter solstice
December 21st, 2012.
Acharya S says, in The Christ Conspiracy,
"Many of the world's crucified godmen
"have their traditional birthdays on December 25th.
"This date is set because the ancients recognized
"that the sun makes an annual descent southward
"until after midnight of December 21st, the winter solstice,
"when it stops moving southerly for three days
"and was born again after midnight of December 24th.
"Thus, these many different cultures
"celebrated with great joy
"the sun of God's birthday on December 25th."
Christmas 2012 marks the beginning of a new great year.
The Milky Way galaxy has a rotational period
that I like to call the Galactic year.
It lasts approximately 224 million years.
Our solar system is related to the
larger cycle through number.
There are 8,640 great years
in the Galactic year.
It's amazing how the earth's precessional cycle
the number of the sun,
and the Decad,
harmonize with the Galactic year.
Before the Italian Renaissance,
there was an earlier flowering of ancient knowledge
in Medieval France.
This was initiated when nine self described
Poor Knights of Christ
returned from a decade of excavation work
undertaken in the Temple Mount of Jerusalem.
The most famous preacher of the age,
St. Bernard de Clairvaux,
argued persuasively on their behalf
at the Council of Troyes in 1129.
This resulted in the Templar Order being officially
chartered and endorsed by the Catholic Church.
The poor Templars instantly became a favorite charity
and it certainly didn't hurt
when the Pope signed an order
saying that they didn't have to pay any taxes,
could pass freely through international borders,
and were exempt from all legal authorities,
save for his own.
This also tells you something about
just how powerful the papacy was in those days.
The Templars accepted large donations
in monetary deposits,
started issuing letters of credit,
opened banks in several countries,
and essentially became the first multinational corporation.
Very quickly the Templars had an abundance of gold
and military power.
To me the question is
what did those nine poor knights find in Jerusalem
that led to their meteoric rise in power?
Could they have found Enoch's Cube,
buried in the Temple Mount from before the Great Flood?
Whatever the case,
I believe they unearthed knowledge, rather than gold.
And with knowledge comes power.
Speaking of someone with sacred knowledge,
St. Bernard de Clairvaux
is a fascinating figure.
Norman Cantor had this to say about Bernard
in his book, The Civilization of the Middle Ages.
Bernard played the leading role
in the development of the Virgin Cult,
which is one of the most important manifestations
of the popular piety of the 12th century.
In early medieval thought,
the Virgin Mary had played a minor role,
and it was only with the rise of emotional Christianity
in the 11th century,
that she became the prime intercessor for humanity
with the deity.
Bernard wrote,
"No one can enter heaven
"unless by Mary
"as though through a door."
In this illumination, Bernard is shown
receiving a stream of milk
from the Virgin's breast.
He wrote several works on the Queen of Heaven,
which was also an epithet used in Ancient Egypt for Isis.
Essentially, Bernard reintroduced the Cult of Isis
to the west, under the veil of Mary.
As the primary architect of the Cistercian
and Templar Orders,
Bernard's writings has a major impact
on the gothic building explosion that ensued all over Europe
for the next 300 years.
On building, Bernard wrote,
"There must be no decoration, only proportion."
As you've seen, proportion
is what sacred geometry is all about.
Although the current cathedral of Our Lady of Chartre
was begun a few decades after St. Bernard's death,
Chartre had long before been a pilgrimage center
dedicated to the Virgin.
Since 876, the site housed the Sancta Camisa,
a tunic said to have been worn by the Virgin Mary.
When the old church at Chartre burned down,
the relic was feared lost.
When the Sancta Camisa was discovered
unharmed in the ashes,
it was deemed a miracle.
The dramatic recovery of the relic
catalyzed medieval Europe's interest
in the building project.
And Chartre ended up becoming the first Cathedral
dedicated to Notre Dame
and one of the finest examples of Gothic architecture
in the world.
More than a place of religious worship,
Chartre was also a cathedral school in the medieval period.
In this school, Platonic and Pythagorian thought
passed through a Christian filter
and resurfaced in the west after a thousand year hiatus.
Chartre remembers Pythagorus in this sculpture
in the right bay of the Royal Portal tympanum.
The seven liberal arts
comprised the curriculum taught in the school of Chartre.
The seven arts were split into two groups,
the trivium and quadrivium.
Trivium is where we get the word trivial,
because grammar, rhetoric, and logic
were considered basic but necessary skills to master
before studying the more challenging quadrivium subjects,
which included number theory, music, geometry,
and astronomy.
Each one of the subjects in the quadrivium
serves as a key to the ancient mysteries.
The seven medieval liberal arts
were a bit different compared to
a liberal arts degree today.
These subjects were taught only to the elite.
The so called servile arts
were taught to tradespeople employed by the elite.
The goal of the servile arts
was not to cultivate critical thinking,
but to develop specific skills required by farmers,
blacksmiths, carpenters, stone masons, and so on.
This liberal, servile division
mirrors the internal division
between speculative Masons,
more commonly known as Freemasons,
and the operative stonemasons.
who actually built the cathedral.
Australian architect John James
has discovered how the floorplan of the cathedral
was laid out ad quadratum,
as you can see from the red squares.
The smaller squares are half the size of the larger,
as octaves are related in music.
The template for the cathedral ground plan
clearly echoes the quadrivium.
Two millenia ago, famed roman archtect Vitruvius
described in his Ten Books of Architecture,
that effective temples are based on the proportions
of the human body.
Vitruvius's written description of ideal human proportions
later influenced many Renaissance artists,
including Leonardo da Vinci and Cesare Cesariano.
Here, Cesariano's Vetruvian Man
fits the cathedral's ground plan
and shows that it was based on
the proprotions of the human body
as laid out in antiquity.
English professor of architecture, Keith Critchlow,
has discovered a fascinating correlation
between the floor plan
and front elevation of Chartre.
Intrigued by the fact that the rose windows,
containing the exquisite stained glass
and the famed labyrinth have equal diameters,
Critchlow compared the plan to the elevation.
The rose window and the labyrinth
line up perfectly, like so.
The golden ball atop the Sun Tower
aligns with the curve of the Apse here.
The Moon Tower's silver ball
corresponds to the rondpoint,
the center from which the chapels radiate.
Clearly the design is correlated in two separate dimensions.
Boaz and Jachin are the names of the two columns
that stood at the entry to Solomon's temple,
that are echoed in all Masonic temples today.
Boaz stood on the left
and the name Boaz means sun.
Jachin stood on the right, and means moon.
This symbolism matches the towers at Chartre.
Critchlow explains that the Sun Tower
is 365 English feet in height.
The Moon Tower is slightly shorter,
some 28 feet less.
These measurements suggest several things.
Number one, the design was based on the English foot.
Number two, the 365 foot Sun Tower symbolizes the year.
And number three, the 28 foot difference in the Moon Tower
symbolizes the 28 day month of four, seven day weeks.
I think this metrology shows how
Chartre is a calendar in stone,
very much like the Roman pantheon.
Before the Christian era,
the grotto below Chartre
was a Druidic shrine of Isis.
Above the crypt today,
there is a black Madonna and Child
called Our Lady of the Pillar,
that many suspect has a meaning older than Christianty.
The Druid grotto housed a sacred dolmen
that was identified with the Womb of the Earth.
Think about it.
Both Isis and Mary were called Queen of Heaven,
identified as so-called Virgins who had unusual conceptions
and later had sons who symbolized the sun,
who also shared the same birthday.
The story of Mary and Jesus
is a recapitulation of the ancient Egyptian story
of Isis and Horus.
The Black Madonna hints at her African origins
while retaining just enough plausible deniability
to avert uncomfortable questions for the Church.
Chartre Cathedral's axis is oriented to the summer solstice
sunrise, just like the red alignment
Sixtus the 5th setup in Vatican Square.
The labyrinth is not a maze
because there is only one path to follow
like the life we live from birth to death.
The labyrinth's 11 concentric rings
match the Ptolemaic cosmology
or spiritual dimension of the cosmos.
Walking the labyrinth is therefore
like taking the journey of the soul.
There are 112 cogs on the outside of the labyrinth,
a fact which has puzzled scholars.
In them, John James has discovered an unexpected connection
to the Arab world.
John James writes,
"The eight century Arab Sufi-alchemist Jabir ibn Hayyan
"divided the four elementary qualities of existence,
"earth, air, fire and water
"into four degrees with seven subdivisions
"giving a total of 112 classifications
"which between them contained all the materials,
"liquids and gasses found in manifest creation."
Known in the west as Geber,
and considered to be the father of chemistry,
he worked in the court of caliph Harun al-Rashid
for whom he wrote the Book of Venus
on the art of alchemy.
His work paved the way for later Islamic and European
alchemists
in their search for the philospher's stone.
Among his long list of achievements
Geber pioneered techniques in glassmaking
that were used in the stained glass
directly above the labyrinth
that bears his philosophical number symbolism.
Modern chemsists still don't understand
what gives the Chartre glass such incredible vibrancy.
Sir Laurence Gardner says,
in the Bloodline of the Holy Grail,
"One of the greatest mysteries of Gothic architecture
"is the stained glass used in the cathedral windows.
"The first appeared in the early 12th century,
"but disappeared just as suddenly a hundred years later.
"Nothing like it has ever been seen before,
"and nothing like it has been seen since."
"Not only is the luminosity of Gothic glass
"greater than any other,
"but its light-enhancement qualities are far more effective.
"Unlike the stained glass of other architectural schools,
"its interior effect is the same
"whether the light outside is bright or dim.
"Even in twilight, this glass retains its brilliance
"way beyond that of any other."
Critchlow says in the, Chartres Cathedral A Sacred Geometry,
DVD, that he was approached by a Hindu gentleman
who explained the meaning of the number symbolism
on the western facade.
In Hinduism, chakras are traditionally symbolized
by lotus flowers with specific numbers of petals.
Amazingly, specific details on the facade
match this symbolism.
The facade is a reminder that the cathedral houses
the body of the church,
or more importantly perhaps,
Chartre is saying the body is the temple.
Chartre is a masterwork of hidden synchrotism
melding beleif systems that secretly transcend
Christian dogma.
The tympanum above the central front doors
of the Royal Portal
encodes an entire cosmology.
The four figures surrounding Christ
depict a man, eagle, lion, and bull.
In Christianity, these are the
four beasts of the apocalypse,
as described in the mystical visions of Ezekiel
and St. john of Patmos.
On the literal level,
it's Jesus with a halo,
waving at us from inside a vesica piscis,
surrounded by the four beasts of the apocalypse.
A strange collection of Christian imagery perhaps
but not uncommon.
In time the four beasts became synonymous
with the four evangelists,
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John.
However, when you understand the symbolism,
a reading of the encoded message
becomes possilble.
As you learned in my crash course in esoteric astronomy,
these beasts are the fixed astrological signs
symbolizing the galactic cross.
Jan Wicherink says Christ's halo
represents the Earth cross.
I see the sun god welcoming you through the
galactic star gate at the moment of your apotheosis,
a royal portal indeed.
I have uncovered sacred design templates
underlying the principal section drawing
cut through Chartre Cathedral.
Stephen Skinner identified circles
guiding the central vault and flying buttress designs
in his book, Sacred Geometry.
His observations allowed me to take the geometric analysis
a few steps further.
I see two sets of three stacked rhombi
guiding the wall design.
Circles drawn from the tips of paired equilateral triangles
define the centers of the buttresses' intrados,
or lower curves, and mark the springline
of the lower arch.
This revolutionary design
allowed the masonry to be lighter
and the windows larger,
admitting the flood of light
characteristic of the Gothic style.
Now you can appreciate how the walls at Chartre
were designed ad triangulum.
What is more,
the diameter of these circles
equals the size of the rose windows
and the labyrinth.
It's almost as if the designer never changed the distance
set between his compasses when
designing the entire structure.
Critchlow points out
that the names of the architects of Chartre
were never recorded.
They were known only as the Masters of the Compasses.
In researching the House of the Temple in DC,
I came across a rare depiction
of the Kabbalistic Tree of LIfe
in Albert Pike's Morals and Dogma,
shown here as a set of three stacked rhombi.
This knowledge encoded at Chartre
was preserved by Freemasons.
For the next revelation,
we turn to music and geometry.
In music an octave is the interval between
one note and another
having double its frequency.
In plane geometry you can symbolize the octave in two ways.
Ad triangulum or ad quadratum.
The circle outside the triangle has
double the diameter of the circle inside.
Circle outside the square
has double the area
of the circle inside.
The central vault
is defined by a larger circle having twice the diameter
of the smaller circle inside
which itself is equal to the diameter
of all the circles in the wall section
the rose windows, and the labyrinth.
Chartre is therefore based on one circle repeated
using musical principles.
Amazinglly the flower of life fits this geometry.
Perhaps the master of the compasses
used the flower as the overarching design template.
You can draw the flower of life
using compasses only.
The nave width is set by a central circle,
which is tangent to four others
having equal diameters
The central circle shown within the yellow triangle
completes the picture.
Masonic society probably began around the time
Chartre was being built.
Recall how St. Bernard de Clairvaux
was instrumental in the formation of the Templars.
And later after the Templars were taken down.
The knowledge they unearthed from Solomon's temple
went back underground to survive in Masonry,
Rosicrucianism, and other secret societies.
Masonic square in compass's emblem,
often depicts these instruments
surrounding the letter G.
As with most symbols,
the meaning of G depends upon your level of knowledge.
I've seen it referred to at times as geometry,
the generative principle,
and most apprpriately for what I'm investigating,
the Great Architect of the Universe.
I discovered a long distance alignment
that leads from France to the United Kingdom.
This one begins very close to Chartre
both in time and space.
Chartre Cathedral was built at the same time
as Bourge Cathedral,
and is only a hundred miles away.
When I was studying Bourge Cathedral,
I kept thilnking about the connections
between the founder of the Gothic style and the Templars.
So I drew a line in Google Earth,
from the central entry of the Bourge Cathedral,
to the entry of Rosslyn Chapel in Scotland.
So what?
You can draw a line between any two points,
but you won't believe what the line passes
directly over in London.
The headquarters of the United Grand Free Masonic Lodge
of England.
The United Grand Lodge of England
is the main governing body of Freemasonry
within England, Wales, and much of the
former British Empire.
The building is on Great Queen Street no less.
UGLE, as the organization is known,
seems to be a fitting acronym for it's
ugly-as-sin container.
Historically 3rd on the site
since Masonic meetings first started here in 1775,
a year before the American Revolution.
Perhaps some of America's Masonic founding fathers
planned the Revolution here.
I'm not sure.
When the Templars were around,
they controlled a sizeable district,
less than have a mile away
in the city of London.
The temple includes Temple Church,
the adjacent middle and other temples,
and a host of related buildings.
The Templars themselves said they designed the
round portion of Temple Church
after the Church of the Holy Sepulchre in Jerusalem,
which also features a rotunda.
Perhaps politics motivated them
to claim Christian providence for their temple.
Long time esoteric researcher John Smout
says a better geometric comparison
is between Temple Church and the Dome of the Rock,
which seems to have a high degree of correlation
with the round church's ground plan.
This makes more sense to me
as the Templars did take their name
from the Temple Mount in Jerusalem.
Case in point, they were never known
as the Knights of the Holy Sepulchre.
Whichever building was ultimately their template,
the Templar influence was so powerful
that they actually got the patriarch of Jerusalem
to come to London and consecrate Temple Church
in 1185.
Temple Church was brought to the public's attention
in The Da Vinci Code,
where it was the scene of a shootout
amidst marble effigies of medieval knights.
The temple served at times
as the residence of kings
and representatives of the the Pope,
while Temple Church itself,
served as a depository bank.
I believe Smout's geometric analysis of Temple Church
is right on the money, if you'll pardon the pun.
The temple plan is laid out with triangles and squares,
which we know from studying Chartre cathedral
have hidden significance.
Triangles and squares are arranged in such as way
as to depict three cubes.
The symbolism of three cubes
is something we've seen before
in the George Washington Masonic National Memorial.
I believe three cubes
symbolize the holographic nature of the universe.
The human, planetary, and stellar scales
resonating as a fractal structure.
As above, so below.
My reasons for coming to this unusual conclusion
will become apparent in the Paris episodes.
After the Great Fire of London in 1666,
Sir Christopher Wren was chosen to redesign
St. Paul's Cathedral.
He oriented St. Paul's in line
with the axis of Temple Church.
Extending beyond St. Paul's,
we see the alignment continues
to the Bank of England.
The bank was chartered in 1694
during the construction of Wren's Cathedral.
More than just a local branch,
the Bank of England is the central bank
of the whole of the United Kingdom
and in the model on which most countries'
modern central banks are based.
The Bank of England is literally the mother of all banks.
Recall how the Templars' meteoric rise in power
came in part by becoming the first
transnational bank
and how Temple Church itself
acted as a bank
whilst housing both royals and Papal representatives.
By tracing the alignment from Temple Church
to the Bank of England through St. Paul's Cathedral,
we draw a connection between Templars,
the modern banking system,
and the church.
Three powerful bedfellows.
The Bank of England presides over a street pyramid
in the heart of the city of London.
The symbolism of the bank over a pyramid
suggests a hidden power relationship
analogous to the House of the Temple
presiding over the pyramid of Washington, DC.
After all, pyramids are a clear symbols of heirarchy,
and one can read it as control
from the top down.
The base of the pyramid
contains the London Stone,
said to be the rock from wihch
all distances in the United Kingdom were measured.
The Romans laid this foundation stone in London,
just as they had done earlier with the
Umbilicus urbis Romae.
You could say this pyramid was built on a rock solid
Roman foundation.
Some of the greatest secrets are hidden in plain sight.
Isn't that strange?
I mean, if you ran a secret society,
why painstakingly encrypt your greatest truths
in alignments, city plans, and in architecture?
I would've thought there were better ways
of keeping secrets.
There must be some kind of power
gained or maintained by hiding these truths
out in the open
where many can see,
but few understand.
Sir Christopher Wren
was a brilliant mathematician, astronomer,
geometer, and architect.
He was an enlightened man
who clearly excelled in the seven liberal arts.
St. Paul's Cathedral is the most important building
of Wren's architectural career.
Stephen Skinner pointed out in his book, Sacred Geometry,
that the length of St. Paul's,
including its entrance steps,
measures 555 feet
and that this distance is equal to the height
of the Washington Monument.
Recall how triple sixes and fives
are encoded in singular measure
as 6,660 inches equals 555 feet.
St. Paul's length therefore symbolizes
the relationship between macrocosm and microcosm.
The distance from the floor of the cathedral
to the top of the cross on its dome
is 365 feet,
matching the height and symbolism
of the Sun Tower at Chartres.
St. Paul's is one of the few places
we're not surprised to see the English foot
used as the unit of measure.
Trying to decipher London from another angle,
I was lookng up Buckingham Palace
and wondering about the perfectly straight axis,
called The Mall, in front of it.
Wanting to trace where this obvious gesture leads,
I need to ask,
where does the royal axis go?
It appears that The Mall leads to the Admiralty Arch.
But then the axis seems to fade away
in the confusion of buildings along the strand,
or does it?
Tracing the axis beginning at Buckingham Palace
passing over the Victoria Memorial,
traveling along The Mall,
going under the Admiralty Arch
and through the buildings on the strand,
the axis arrives precisely at Temple Bar.
Temple Bar was a gate designed by Sir Christopher Wren
to ceremonially bar access to the city of London.
It got the name Temple
from being directly in front of the Templar compound.
The temple was taken over by the Inns of Court
after the Templars were ousted in 1307.
The middle temple and outer temple
are two of the Inns of Court,
to which all barristers in England
must today belong.
In fact, the phrase, the bar, meaning the legal profession
as a whole,
can be traced back to Temple Bar.
Wren's gate is no longer there,
but tradition and the law remain.
Traditionally the Lord Mayor
would offer the Sword of State to the Queen
when she passed through the gate
as a token of loyalty.
It is a little known legal fact
that the monarch may not enter the city of London
without the permission of the Lord Mayor of London.
What's up with that?
I always thought the Queen was the one in charge.
You might be surprised to learn that
the Lord Mayor is not the mayor of London,
nor is the city of London
the same as Greater London.
Confused?
The law can do that.
The person the Queen bows to
is the Lord Mayor of London.
He's the guy who runs the city of London Corporation,
a tiny private jurisdiction
that covers only about one square mile.
The wealthiest square mile on earth,
as it's often referred to,
is the Sovereign state within Greater London,
whose boundary closely follows
the ancient Roman Walls of Londinium.
In Isaac Newton's day,
there were more than 200,000 souls
living within the square mile,
but now that figure is down to less than 10,000.
Today, the tiny city of London
has become a leading center of global finance.
Other powerful sovereign cities
within cities that come to mind
are, of course, the United Nations headquarters
and Vatican City.